Well, we’re talking about humility.
And from the discussion,
we can appreciate how humility
as a key is much needed if we’re going
‘to view others as superior to us.’
But it’s easy to talk about humility.
It is another thing to acquire humility,
and that may be a challenge.
Note the expression, the statement,
made at 1 Peter 5:5,
in the middle of the verse
—1 Peter 5:5:
“But all of you clothe yourselves
with humility toward one another.”
Now that expression
‘clothe yourself’ is significant
because it helps us appreciate
that humility is a quality
that only we personally can put on.
It is not inherited.
And, for sure, it doesn’t come naturally.
We have to do it ourselves,
and we have to be willing to do it.
Now, in addition,
the challenge that we have with humility
is to wear
the garment of humility at all times.
And this is so because humility
is not encouraged in the world right now.
We are surrounded by individuals
who are encouraged
to be proud because of race,
education, natural abilities,
social status—to “be somebody,” excel.
And it is the sign of the times
—of the time of the end—
people are “lovers of themselves, . . .
puffed up with pride.”
But Jehovah is not impressed
with the abilities or privileges
or talents that we have
and, anyway, he gave them to us.
Note what is recorded
at 1 Corinthians 4:7
—1 Corinthians 4:7:
“Who makes you different from another?
“Indeed, what do you have
that you did not receive?
“If, in fact, you did receive it,
why do you boast
as though you did not receive it?”
Plainly stated,
we have it because somebody gave it to us.
However, this is an interesting point:
Jehovah does not give humility.
We have to acquire it ourselves;
that’s what the scripture said:
‘clothe yourself,’
but Jehovah expects that we do it.
It is not a recommendation.
So how we view ourselves
is important to Jehovah.
It matters to him.
So, therefore, the aspect of humility,
to “consider others
superior to [us],” is important.
But it has to be genuine humility.
Now, why do we say genuine humility?
Because there is a false humility.
It is mentioned in Colossians chapter 2.
And false humility is a desire
to elevate oneself above others
by an outward appearance of humility
just to impress people,
and that is not going to make us
consider others superior to us.
But the challenge
that we have with humility is
to wear the garment of genuine humility
at all times.
And this is real.
Now, why?
Because at times, circumstances may change
for the better in our situation
or circumstances
may not meet our preferences.
When that happens,
it impacts how we feel—our feelings.
Note this situation as an example:
Hagar, Sarah, and Abraham.
Let’s go to Genesis chapter 16.
Genesis 16:4 says:
“So [Abraham] had relations with Hagar,
“and she became pregnant.
“When she realized that she was pregnant
“[a change of circumstances
for the better for her],
she began to despise her mistress.”
Interesting, the change of feelings.
So Hagar had a hard time seeing Sarah
as superior to her.
Now, from Jehovah’s viewpoint,
what was the solution to the problem?
Please go to verse 9 of the same chapter:
“Jehovah’s angel then said to her:
“‘Return to your mistress and [what?]
humble yourself under her hand.’”
“Clothe [yourself] with humility.”
Now, another example
of the impact a change of circumstances
can have on displaying humility is Korah.
Now, Korah was a cousin,
a first cousin, of Moses and Aaron;
was a prominent man in Israel;
and had seen beautiful examples
of Jehovah’s power and glory.
But it appears that the unfavorable
circumstances in the wilderness
affected his view of himself.
And he along with others
resented the fact that so far,
‘We’re not in the Promised Land.’
But also, in addition to that,
as shown at Psalm 106:16,
it seems that Korah started to envy
Moses and Aaron
and resented their prominence,
their appointment.
He could not see them as superior to him.
Well, humility would have helped Korah
appreciate that Moses’ and Aaron’s
appointment
really came from Jehovah.
He appointed them for the privilege
that they were enjoying.
But his lack of humility
caused him not just to envy Moses;
it went further than that.
And this is serious.
Please note what happened
according to the record
in Numbers chapter 16.
Numbers 16:3 says:
“So they [Korah and the group]
“gathered together against Moses and Aaron
“and said to them:
‘We have had enough of you!
“‘The whole assembly is holy,
“‘all of them, and Jehovah is in their midst.
“‘Why, then, should you exalt yourselves
above the congregation of Jehovah?’”
Can you imagine saying that
to an appointment by Jehovah?
Yes, this was a serious matter.
Lack of humility moved
these individuals to rebel.
And it is a lesson for us
what the lack of humility can lead to.
The tragic end of Korah
makes it very, very clear.
And on the other hand, we see
a beautiful example in the sons of Korah.
They showed a humble spirit.
And they were happy and content
with being just helpers,
or assistants, to the priests.
And interesting, too, humility helped them
not to follow their parents.
So it is obvious
as we review this issue of humility
that the garment of humility
at all times is needed.
And this is especially when circumstances
change in our lives for the better
or our expectations
are not totally fulfilled.
But humility can help us
in our day-to-day activities too.
Psalm 15:4 says:
“He does not go back on his promise,
even when it is bad for him.”
So humility will help us to be true
to our promise, to our work,
regardless of to whom we’ve made the promise.
So we can see the value
of genuine humility as we worship Jehovah.
And what will be the reward
for clothing ourselves with humility?
Well, let’s read it in Proverbs chapter 22,
and let’s read verse 4:
“The result of humility
“and the fear of Jehovah is riches
and glory and life.”
Beautiful, isn’t it?
It’s worthwhile, clothing
ourselves with humility.